Is given to us.
So
Does that mean we can have extended time?
Well, we'll see. We'll see. We'll see what, um, we'll,
we'll stick to, um, thank you.
Welcome Dean. And we are discussing the local government
systems improvement.
Amen, bill. Um,
and we have, I think, only five minutes
for your submission individual.
So, um, over to you.
And you're welcome to leave some
time for questions at the end.
And we have received and read your questions.
Thank you. And et the committee.
As you know, I'm a professor of, um, law, AKA Victoria,
university of Wellington and local government.
It's one of my areas of interest and expertise.
So I will try and be brief
because, um, three particular
points that I pulled out of the bill.
First is the amendment of local government's purpose,
which I pose, uh, in my view,
this changes rhetoric only it legally won't actually change
the scope of the activities local authorities can engage in.
And I wrote about this when the purpose of recast
previously away from community wellbeings.
And that article was provided as part of my submission.
Um, in short, the framing of purpose in the proposed terms,
um, um, amongst other things for the delivery
of local public services, which can be the key aspect of
that moves from an outcome, outcomes based mission
to an outputs based activity list or functional list.
But when we look at the key phrase, local public services,
that's a meaningless phrase.
It's so contextual, it's so ambiguous, it's so contested
that it can basically mean anything.
It's what we call in the trade a floating signifier.
It's, it's an idea that can be filled
with whatever normative content one wa one wants.
And that means it's enact as a def a, a regulator
of, uh, jurisdiction.
So the proposed change, in my view,
is more performative only.
And to the extent that the change is symbolic,
I think it sends a bad signal.
'cause it sits at odds with the very raison detra
or the essence of local government
and our traditions internationally.
And the constitutional thinking has always been that local,
local government does more than the mere service delivery
like a government department.
One of its essential features is its democratic character,
its ability to be responsive to the needs of
and priorities of the community.
It's about localism,
or I prefer to put democracy in the neighborhood.
So central government prescriptions
of activity sits in tension with that.
Secondly, the clause codifying the provision of information
to elected members is one which I support,
but I think needs to be tweaked to make it work.
And I've been a vocal commentator in the space on the
anti-democratic practices of some chief executives
that resist the provision of information to the councilors
and keep our democratic stewards in the dark about the
matters they're ultimately accountable to the community on.
So I think the codification is wise,
but I worry that it still leaves the chief executive
as the ultimate gatekeeper.
In other words, on its face, it's up to the chief executive
to make the call on whether something is reasonably
necessary for an elected member's duties.
Just to a couple of things on that, I think without more
that risk exacerbating the problem
and fortifying the power imbalances,
it invites the chief executive just
to say to the council, you don't need it.
Trust me. We'll deal with that. It's operational.
That's wrong. Existing English common law authority,
which we've previously relied on,
actually the governing body itself should make these calls
and marginal cases something I
suggest to be drafted in the act.
'cause when you think about it in principle,
in the New Zealand context, it's hard
to think about information held by local authority
that isn't reasonably necessary for the, those councilors
to discharge their stewardship
and accountability of the community.
I've mentioned a couple of areas, which I think
beyond scope, personal employment matters matter
for the chief executive because of employment, uh,
duties there and elected member
having a conflict of interest.
I also think there needs to be a swift effective
and independent external review mechanism
for elected members, uh, to test that, um,
denial of information.
I've suggested the on boards,
but I'm actually a bit uncomfortable about that
because as responsible elected members,
I don't think they should have
to rely on the maladministration complaints process
for the general public when it's actually a matter
of internal democratic governance.
Constitutional, the last point I wanna say, uh,
is I support the concept of pre prescribed
or model code of contract.
Again, I've been publicly vocal on some of the weaponization
of codes and the chilling of democratic mandate, uh, uh,
democratic discourse.
But I think the efficacy of this depends on the work of,
for example, local government commission on its model code.
Um, but I'm being disappointed
to only learn about the consultation on
that draft after it closed.
And having looked at it, I think there's some really
worrying aspects which
entrenched some of the problems there.
So I just see, to my submission,
I think the legislation should set out some guiding
principles for the development of those codes,
even if the actual detail of it is still dealt elsewhere.
So I've been pretty brief. I'm happy to take questions.
Yeah, no, we have someone hoping. Thank you. Yeah.
Look, um, thank you very much. Um,
and I agree with you about the, um,
The full wellbeings because, uh, when it was in
or out, it didn't actually
make a lot of difference to what we did.
Um, but what I'm interested in is how we actually make sure
that the councils do what they need to do, uh,
and also don't spend too much of rate payers money.
Um, in other words, they, there's a bit of discipline.
So how we get that balance right.
And if I can just ask the second question as you,
'cause you've gone quite a, you've said quite a bit about
the CEEs, um, at the moment, the proposition
and the bill is to say CE five years
and then another five up to another five years.
But it strikes me that ces,
the power the CES have in part is
because of the duration that they
get compared to the council.
And whether you have any comment on that, it was, you know,
count council gets three C gets five, you know,
who's, who's the stronger one?
That's right on the first one.
I'm a believer in democracy,
but I think we've got a, you know, in the ballot box,
and I think we've got some challenges
after the la the last weekend about improving that.
But, you know, the, the, the, the, the, the idea
of local government is this stuff is deliberated in
conversation with community.
So I think we, you know, the work about how do we,
how do we reengage
and revitalize the, um, local democracy
is the ultimate thing
because that relation, that stewardship relationship
between the elected members and the community is key, uh,
for sending signals and priorities.
And, and you know, we just got to crack that.
I don't, I mean, it's not the don't have the time and the,
and the minutes to go to say how that's done.
Yeah. But it's actually the, you know, it, it,
it it's about local authorities, uh, standing up
for the value of what being a, you know,
an elected local body does, and the value that brings.
And I think we've, it's been lost in the noise at the
moment, uh, in terms of the ge es and the power.
But I agree with your read.
I think that's one of the real problems.
And one, one of the problems I think,
which probably feeds in the first thing is people are voting
for elected members thinking they're driving the ship.
And if the, if the real power lies in the chief executive
and the management, then you've got this disconnect
between the power and the representation.
So for me, I'm a big one in saying
that we've gotta strengthen the role of elected members,
whether it be, you know,
this is a good one on the information budget, uh,
using the Auckland Mayor's model, another one contest,
you know, support for elected members
to do their job better.
And then you've got a better conversation on the fiscal
things and the priorities
and where the spend is, rather than being done off in the,
in the, in the, um, the bowels of the,
of the council office itself.
You know, let's bring it out.
Let's bring, let's not get,
there is politics in local government.
That's a good thing because that fuels the democracy
and the democratic discourse.
So let's not be afraid of having some politics
and real contestation around the political branch and, and,
and conversation with the community.
Hmm. Thank you. We are out of time now,
but we really appreciate your submission
and a brief, uh, oral submission today.
And, and you're, you're writing on this, so thank you.
I'm sure we'll see you again. Thank you so
Much. I might get, I might get
in touch with you, Dean. Thank
You. Welcome.
Thank you. Now I'd like to welcome our next, uh,
submitters, Frank Oglevy, Bridget
and Mark got a copy of your written submission,
and we've got, uh, 10 minutes to hear from you.
Thank you. Um, thank you
for the opportunity to appear for you today.
Uh, as introduced, we are Frank Oglevy.
We are commercial and public law
firm based here in Wellington.
Our submission is based on the perspective
that we have advised councilors, councils and rate payers,
and that that informs the,
the practicality I think of our submission.
Yeah. Kira, um, like the previous submission,
we're quite concerned about the democratic
character of local government.
And we think one of the key challenges is the balance
between elected officials and council officers.
Um, we support, uh, the general thrust of the bill
to address some of these issues,
but we think there are other areas where the bills needs
to be strengthened and some additional
mechanisms need to be introduced.
So we wanted to focus on four points, two, which, uh,
in the bill and, uh, should be strengthened.
And two new points that we think would, um,
add to the bill's balance.
So firstly, we also wanted
to touch on the member's right to information.
Uh, we think this is a really positive step forward.
Uh, we have dealt with many councilors, uh,
and mayors who have struggled to get information out of, uh,
their CEEs and out of their officials.
Uh, just last week I had a mayor struggling
to get information, um, on a large contractor spend
that was being directly asked of them by rate payers, uh,
to be accountable on.
Um, we think the test though here is wrong.
Uh, the reasonably necessary test basically ensures
that counselors actually have a lower right
to information than the general public.
That's not a test that's required in the laima.
Uh, we think that they elected members, uh,
as those elected members have, the should have the ability
to determine whether or not it's something
that they need necessary to govern.
Uh, we also agree with the previous submitter too,
that the final decision should not rest with the ce,
it should be with that governing body.
Secondly, uh, we wanted to just look at
that governance powers.
Uh, and once again, that balance, I think, uh,
that was adhered to hear about the making sure
that it's the counselors that are the ones
that are governing, uh, it implies in this act.
But we think that needs to be made explicit.
Uh, the company's act has a helpful provision
that could be modeled on,
which gives the governing body the full power to direct
and supervised all activities.
Uh, that would basically mean
that the chief executive acts under the direction
of counselors unless the statute says otherwise.
And we think that basically aligns it back,
that counselors are accountable, uh, to rate payers
and staff are accountable to counselors. Uh,
As Bridget said, there are two areas
where we think the bill could, uh, we could add to the bill.
Um, one is around the trend we're seeing
of counselors being told they can't participate due
to predetermination or non-financial conflicts.
We find this really concerning.
Um, there was a ca, uh, example in carton carton district
where, um, councilor grace ing was disqualified from voting
on the long-term plan on the basis
of having put in a personal submission.
Um, we had the case here in Wellington
where Councilor Chung was, um, told he may not be allowed
to vote on the, on the budget
because he'd done a survey of local constituents on it.
Um, as, uh, as previously, um, professor Knight said, um,
that the, the law only requires an open mind,
not an empty mind, but,
but that's not a test
that council chief executives seem to be applying.
This is really, this is actually really worrying council's
being told that again, we've just had
with local elections count, um, candidates going up
and down the country getting a mandate
and then being told on the basis of
that they shouldn't be allowed
to participate in the decisions
of the very body that have just been elected to.
So, um, paragraph 56 of our submission, we propose, um,
a change that you could, um, insert into the bill
that would clarify that having a view doesn't mean
that you should be excluded from decision making.
And finally, this one might seem a bit, um, obscure,
but we think there is an issue, uh, uh, a need for clarity
around a rule around use
of council resources for electioneering.
We've had a lot of engagement with the, um, audit,
the auditor general on this this year.
Their firm view is the prohibition is on councils using
council resources
to promote the election of sitting councilors.
That cannot be done. It's fine.
We'll accept that strict reading of their rule.
The Willington city council could have voted
to run billboards, um, asking people to vote
for Andrew Little in the last election.
Now we all know that's
absurd and that couldn't have happened.
But he wasn't an incumbent, he wasn't a sitting counselor.
So on there, the, on the, and, and we're not making this up.
We've been back and forth with the audit office on this,
this is their view that the rule binds councils
around sitting counselors.
It's not good enough. And we have a, a case, um,
in the hut about 20 years ago,
Cusso versus Hut City Council, where high court found that,
um, that you, you can't, uh, you can have a elector, uh,
regularity if a council uses council resources to try
to influence a a local poll in that case.
Um, in that case, the facts didn't find, didn't stack up
that irregularity, but it could have occurred.
Now that also high another issue.
The the auditor general guidance
doesn't touch on local polls.
It's, we should be really clear
and it could be a really clear legislative solution
that we've put in paragraph 69 of our submission.
Let's just make it clear you can't use resources to campaign
for the election of councilors
or to influence the outcome of a poll before the rate pass.
So just in closing, there was four main takeaways we'd
like you to have from our submission.
One that councilors shouldn't have less rights
to information than the general public under the laima.
That we need to make clear under governor's powers
that the council's in charge not officials, uh,
that predetermination is not made just
because you campaign on something
and that we shouldn't be using council
resources for election hearing.
Thank you very much, Andy.
Um, I'll start with the, I've got two areas I wanted
to ask, but first of all, the, the conflict of interest one,
because I've come across it many times, um, seems
to me there's a difference between situation
where somebody is campaigning on something
and saying, I'm, you know, this is what I believe,
as opposed to I am going to vote this way.
That's a different thing.
'cause that acceptance, a closure of mind, my view.
And that's certainly the advice we've as council we'd had
before go saw somebody disqualified in that situation.
And the other one that you raised,
the two examples you raised, the situation
where somebody's made a submission on something
is quite a different proposition.
'cause that says, that's what I want to have.
And you've entered into the formal process.
And it's like me, it is not like me sitting there
and saying, this is what I think should happen in this bill.
And then also coming and sitting here.
You make a judge, you judge, well not judge a jury,
but you both sides of the argument
that surely can't be right.
Look,
If you as a member of parliament did make a submission on
a bill, you can still vote on it in, um, in Parliament.
And that happens more. I,
I, I find that troubling. But, um, yeah,
But you are not actually conflicted.
You have having a, a view
and putting forward, um, a position.
Our, our submission is that should not disqualify you.
Um, people should be aware of it. That's fine.
It is, you know, in this case, the, um, the counselor,
there was nothing secret about it.
Public submission, this is what I think we should do.
It doesn't mean that they can't be convinced.
They can't have their mind changed. You know?
Now there, we've, we've drafted a proposed test,
which would mean if, um, you know, if you make it clear
that you don't have an open mind, that you
have completely predetermined position, that's different.
But having a view, going into a discussion saying, this is,
this is the position I take, this is my starting point.
That shouldn't lock you out of the discussion.
What's the point of locking people out of the discussion
that way their mind can't be changed.
I ask for stuff on that.
I, I, I don't necessarily agree with Andy,
but I, I mean, I think often in technical politics,
you people do have very clear view views,
arguably close minds and still participate in discussions
and votes, um, on that.
And so isn't isn't it more
that when we are looking at conflicts of interest,
we're actually looking at real conflicts of interest
that people would understand in the real world.
For example, um,
does this person personally benefit from this
decision in a financial way?
I mean, that is a legitimate conflict of interest.
Does their family member, um, benefit from it? Mm-hmm.
Those are conflicts of interests
that we should be seeking to prohibit.
Not actually, um, whether someone has a preconceived idea
or not shouldn't really be relevant to their participation.
It's concerning to hear that that's, that's the case.
Yeah. I dunno if you've got
A, oh, I was gonna say, it doesn't pay anyway.
It doesn't say, it doesn't say much for your consideration
of any other bo anybody else's views though.
If you've got a fixed view and that, I
think it becomes the problem.
Look, the other area I did wanna ask you about is this.
Um, and it's the area I did ask Dean about earlier.
It's that issue of balance between, um,
elected members and the ce.
And it's particularly that issue around the length
of term CE has,
and this bill also suggests effectively a potential
lengthening of a CEEs term, um, effectively to 10 years, uh,
obviously is right, right.
Make a decision halfway through,
but effectively to 10 years without actually going back
to the market again, which is
longer than we've got at the moment.
And that seems to rein to me to,
to give the c even more power than they've currently got.
Now, vis-a-vis the councils who would've had to go
through three elections during that period.
I, I don't think it's something that has raised concerns
for us because I think there's an element
of continuity from, um, having officials
and having that knowledge.
I think the balance is better addressed between, uh,
by making, strengthening
that operational government's, uh, determination.
Because what we have seen in practical experience is
longstanding CES tend to, for want of a better word,
hoard their operational areas and try
and push me mes who may have,
or counselors who have less experience by saying,
this is actually just for me.
You can't be involved in staffing
decisions or anything like that.
So I think that's where you want to address the balance.
Similar, it's with that right to information.
If counselors have that information, they're able
to hold the CCE two account much better on their decisions
and ultimately, if they need to, can override them.
Thank you. We have now run out of time.
Um, but we have, uh, thank you, um, to both, um, submitters
and in person, both groups.
Uh, and it's something that Andy and I
and the rest of the committee are very interested in.
And just also just
before leave, if you've got any thoughts on what we can do
as a governance and administration committee on local
government after these elections, I think is a good time.
We'd be interested, I think,
to hear mm-hmm. From that, well, there will
Be a review of the election process
at some point in time anyway, so
Thank you. Thank you, thank you
very much. So I think
we've got our next submitter, Dr. John McDonald,
worry on Zoom.
Kiara. Kiara, welcome.
Audio's working. Welcome, welcome to the Governance
and Administration Committee.
Thank you, uh, for joining us.
We've got a copy of your written submission
and we've got five minutes, uh, to hear from you today.
So you're welcome to use all of that time
or leave some time for questions over to you.
Uh, Kiata, um, generally supportive of this bill.
Uh, the first form for aims refocusing purpose
of local government measure measuring
and publicizing council performance,
prioritizing core services and council spending
and strengthening council transparency and accountability.
So those are all worthy, um, and sensible and needed goals.
Um, little bit concerned about the fifth aim
of providing regulatory relief to councils in terms
of the bureaucracy, I think councils, um,
that maybe are not regulated enough.
Um, so, um, I've got some concerns,
mainly focused on that area.
Um, going through some specific concerns
where I think the bill should be changed.
You've got cause five, which is
loosening up public notice requirements, um,
got some concerns about that.
My reading of it, which could be incorrect, is
that councils might be able to get away
with just making a notice in the Gazette and nothing else.
Um, which could allow councils to sneak
through things without, um, the public knowing about them.
Since most of the public are not reading the Gazette.
Um, as much as I want
to deny revenue from the local newspaper,
which isn't doing a good job, I think councils need
to be put under more regulation in terms
of informing the public.
We've got too many things that get snuck through.
Um, so I think that needs to be reconsidered.
Um, got concerns about the chief executive term extension.
I think that would be, could be used by
a council that's about to be voted out
to give the chief executive, uh, large extension
to their contract term
and effectively hamstrung hamstring the next council.
And they would not be able to make the changes they want
to change since that CEO's got a locked in,
um, five year term.
Um, I personally think that the CEO's terms should
be standard of one year.
You might not wanna require them to advertise
for a new CEO every year,
but at least have the CEO able for the new council
to come in and replace the CEO within a year without any
financial burden on the rate players.
Uh, clause seven, uh, uh,
the concern in that one is in terms
of other recreational facilities in terms of core services,
if that includes these semi-commercial stadiums
and event centers, um,
that would be a concern since they are a major drain on
Hamilton City Council, and I assume a number
of other councils around, um, the country.
Um, we don't want to have councils forced
to consider those a core service.
They're an optional extra
and have often been a very bad commercial
investment for the council.
Um, the other issue I raised
in my document was about protected transactions,
section 1 1 7, the local government act, I think
that really needs to be looked at.
It's, um, as I describe it, it's one
of the most dodgy looking pieces of legislation I've seen.
Um, I don't understand why you've got clauses in there,
which seem to put the rate payers on the hook,
even if it's outright fraud used to create debts.
Um, there's a number of phrases in there which are very
concerning, purportedly into, into being
outside the capacity, rights
or powers of local authority,
not having been validly appointed, not in the authority
to exercise power and documents not being valid
and genuine in terms of, by my reading of it, creating debts
that the rate payers are liable for.
Um, so I think at the minimum it should be that
if someone is loaning money to a council
or getting into a financial arrangement with the council,
um, they should at least make sure that
that has been approved by the chief executive officially.
And if it's large enough ratified by council,
you shouldn't have a situation where someone, my reading
of it could be impersonating a council employee, um,
and rack up debts and then make rate payers liable for it.
So I think that's me done.
If there's any questions, I'm happy to answer them.
Don't have any questions. I think that's clear.
I've just checked with our question committee members.
No, well thank you so much, uh, for joining us today,
and thanks for your written submission
and your detailed, um, suggestions as well.
And we'll take those into account with our,
Any of you have insight into why
protected transactions are in there.
Um, well it's a, this is a government, government bills,
so I'll look to, look my colleagues,
This is what's currently in the local government act
and something else you should look at in terms
of the time for change.
We'll make sure we, we, um, raise that with officials.
So thank, thank you so much for your time today. Thank you.